The stress response is characterized by a hyper-metabolic state. This response involves increases in brain wave activities, heart rate, blood pressure, and breathing and often involves racing thoughts and a sense of uneasiness. The stress response is referred to as the flight or fight response; in this state, your body is preparing for action, mobilizing energy sources (Garrett and Hough 2022). The stress response leads to increases in the stress hormones: adrenaline, nor-adrenaline, and cortisol. The response can be triggered by a range of conditions, including emotions or perceiving a threat or danger when there may or may not be an immediate threat. In addition, physical exhaustion, exercise, or other external stimuli can induce stress. Excessive stress is related to an array of negative outcomes. Opposite the stress response is the relaxation response. This response is characterized by a hypo-metabolic rate. The relaxation response involves increases in alpha brain wave activity (often associated with calm and relaxation) and decreases in heart rate, blood pressure, and breathing. The relaxation response is associated with feelings of calmness and well-being. Benefits of relaxation include improved attention, meta-awareness (being exceptionally aware of the contents of the mind), non-judgmental acceptance of thoughts, improved sports and academic performance, and pain relief (Benson and Proctor 2010). With the wide range of possible benefits related to relaxation, it isn’t surprising that researchers who study behavior, cognition, and physiology are interested in the science of relaxation.

Relaxation Strategies

There are a variety of techniques used to improve relaxation. Controlled breathing, visualization, body scans, concentrating on a mantra (repeating of a word or phrase), and progressive muscle relaxation are techniques often used to enhance relaxation. Visualization consists of thinking about visual images that are often associated with calm, relaxed states; as an example, images often includes scenes in nature. When performing body scans, attention is focused on sensations coming from different body parts. As your attention scans over your entire body, awareness of different sensations generated by each body part becomes evident (Jha 2021). Controlled breathing generally involves slow, deep controlled breathing. Progressive muscle relaxation consists of focused attention on the tensing and relaxing of different muscle groups; this technique involves instructions to tense specific body parts at varying degrees of tension, followed by complete relaxation of those body parts. These techniques and related strategies are often incorporated into meditation. The specifics of the techniques and their interactions vary. “There is no single, correct approach for triggering the relaxation response or employing any other mind body technique” (Benson and Proctor 2010).

In one study, it was found that the relaxation response led to increased nitric oxide (NO) levels throughout the body (Dusek et al. 2006). This is an important finding as NO has been shown to have positive benefits on the body’s antibacterial, antiviral, and stress responses; it is also a potent vasodilator (leads to dilation/expansion of blood vessels). The study compared two groups of participants; the groups included the relaxation response group and a control group. The participants in the relaxation response group received instructions to perform body scans, repeat a mantra, and mindfulness techniques, while those in the control group listened to audio tapes consisting of health messages. The researchers concluded the relaxation response may be mediated by NO, which helps explain its clinical benefits for stress related disorders.

A study conducted by Sara Lazar and colleagues (Lazar et al. 2005) used brain imaging to examine whether the practice of meditation could be associated with changes in the brain’s structure. The study involved placing individuals with extensive meditation experience into a fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging) device that displayed three-dimensional images of various parts of the brain. A control group (no meditation background) were also studied using the fMRI procedure. The imaging showed that those who were experienced in inducing the relaxation response through meditation had thicker brain regions, including those regions associated with attention, sensory, cognitive, and emotional processing. The researchers concluded that the relaxation response may prevent age-related brain losses.

There are multiple studies showing that relaxation can lower blood pressure. A study was conducted by Herbert Benson and colleagues (1974) to test whether regular elicitation of the relaxation response might lower blood-pressure in hypertensive (high blood pressure) patients who were taking medication. Fourteen people, who elicited the relaxation response in addition to taking medication over a twenty-week period, were examined. The results showed an average decrease in blood pressure at the end of the study. It was concluded that regular elicitation of the relaxation response can be useful in the management of hypertensive subjects who are already on drug therapy. Research indicates that the relaxation response can benefit those with high blood pressure and people that have borderline high blood pressure. However, relaxation techniques alone may not be enough to manage blood pressure in some conditions.

The late Herbert Benson (MD and researcher) asserted that some of the most dramatic finding demonstrating the benefits of the relaxation response were found in relation to genetic activity. These studies have found that producing the relaxation response through various strategies will change the body’s gene activity/expression (turning genes on). The participants in these studies used different strategies to induce the relaxation response. These strategies include repeating a mantra, different forms of meditation, focused attention, visualization, yoga, and repetitive prayer. The relaxation response is associated with systemic gene expression changes that to some degree diminish the negative impact of stress (Benson and Proctor 2010).

The relaxation response is associated with positive outcomes in the classroom. Students taught to elicit the relaxation response show improved self esteem, fewer inappropriate classroom behaviors, and improvements in blood pressure. In a study with middle school students, it was shown that those who attended more than two semester long classes, with exposure to a relaxation response curriculum, had higher grade point averages, better work habits, and higher levels of cooperation than those who attended two or fewer such classes (Benson et al. 2000).

Below are a couple exercises that can be used to induce relaxation. The time periods and frequency should be adjusted accordingly. 

Controlled Breathing

In this activity participants will practice controlling their breathing for five minutes. Participants will generally perform this activity while seated. Instructions are:

This activity involves only nasal breathing; don’t inhale or exhale through the mouth. Close your eyes and inhale through the nose, while concentrating on feeling the sensations associated with the inhale; your stomach should expand, and the inhale is slow and controlled. Next, slowly exhale; don’t force out the air, just let it flow through the nose. With each exhale, count; after ten total breaths (full inhale and exhale), restart the count. If your mind starts to wander bring it back to full focus on the sensation of breathing and the counting of the number of breaths you take. You should begin by performing this activity for five minutes, one time per day.

Progressive Muscle Relaxation

In this activity, participants will tense and then relax various body parts. This activity is generally performed while seated or lying down. Instructions are:

Focus your attention on your lower body (feet, legs, hips) and tense your lower body to level 6 (that is from an intensity scale ranging from 1–10); hold the tension for five seconds and then release. When you release you should feel total relaxation. Focus your attention on your torso (chest, back, mid-section) and tense your torso to a level 6 (that is from a scale of 1–10); hold the tension for five seconds and then release. When you release, you should feel total relaxation. Focus your attention on your arms and shoulders and tense them to a level 6 (that is from a scale of 1–10); hold the tension for five seconds and then release. When you release, you should feel total relaxation. Now tense your entire body to a level 8 (that is from a scale of 1–10); hold the tension for five seconds and then release. Repeat the cycle (a cycle includes the level 6 holds followed by the level 8 hold) two to three times.